Add documentation for agent, chatbot and MCP added to Otel-demo (#10574)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/demo/services/chatbot.md

---
title: Chatbot Service
linkTitle: Chatbot
aliases: [chatbotservice]
cSpell:ignore: gradio httpx
---

The Chatbot service provides a browser-based chat UI for the OpenTelemetry
Astronomy Shop demo. It uses [Gradio](https://www.gradio.app/) to render the
interface and forwards user messages to the [Agent service](../agent/).

[Chatbot service source](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/blob/main/src/chatbot/)

## Overview

> - Runtime: Python 3.11

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Runtime: Python 3.14
```

Whenever this one gets merged: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/pull/3557

- Default port: `7860`, exposed outside Docker at
  `http://localhost:8080/chatbot/`

The service starts from `run.py`, configures OpenTelemetry tracing, creates a
`ChatAgentUI`, and launches a Gradio `ChatInterface`. When running, the chatbot
UI is available at
[http://localhost:8080/chatbot/](http://localhost:8080/chatbot/).

## How it works

1. A user submits a message in the Gradio chat UI.
2. The chatbot sends a request to the Agent service at:

   ```text
   http://${AGENT_ENDPOINT}:${AGENT_PORT}/prompt
   ```

3. The Agent service returns a response object.
4. The chatbot displays the final message from the response in the UI.

Request body sent to the Agent service:

```json
{
  "message": "List available products",
  "session_id": "<gradio-session-id>",
  "history": []
}
```

The `history` field carries past interactions with the agent in the same
session, and is an empty list for the first request.

### Default requests

To omit the requirement of LLM access, a limited number of requests have
pre-defined responses. Requests users can try out are:

1. Show all available products in the store.
2. What currencies are supported by the Astronomy Shop?

> 3. What current promotions are available on binoculars?

Reviewer: Do we need to say the exact same thing here and in `agent`?

Author: Ive removed it from the `agent`.

| `AGENT_ENDPOINT`               | `0.0.0.0` in code, `agent` in `.env` | Hostname of the Agent service.                                                                           |
| `AGENT_PORT`                   | `8010`                               | Port of the Agent service.                                                                               |
| `AGENT_CHAT_INTERFACE_TIMEOUT` | `300`                                | Timeout, in seconds, for calls from the chatbot to the Agent service.                                    |
| `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME`            | `chatbot` in Compose                 | Service name used in telemetry.                                                                          |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT`  | `otel-collector`                     | OTLP endpoint used by the OpenTelemetry exporter. In Compose this points to the OpenTelemetry Collector. |
| `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`     | inherited                            | Additional OpenTelemetry resource attributes.                                                            |

### Docker Compose configuration

> In `docker-compose.yml`, the service is named `chatbot` and is built from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `compose.agent.yaml`, the service is named `chatbot` and is built from
```

`src/chatbot/Dockerfile`. It depends on the `agent` service. The frontend proxy
receives `CHATBOT_HOST` and `CHATBOT_PORT`, so the chatbot can be exposed
through the demo UI, usually under `/chatbot`.

## Local development

> From the repository root, install dependencies. Run the Agent service first,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the `src/chatbot`, install dependencies. Run the Agent service first,
```

Maybe add a link to Agent docs? (pointing to how to run the Agent locally section)

---
title: Chatbot Service
linkTitle: Chatbot

> aliases: [chatbotservice]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
